Software Engineer's guide to A/B testing (#6231)
PostHog/posthog.com: contents/blog/ab-testing-guide-for-engineers.md

---
date: 2023-07-04

> title: "A software engineer's guide to A/B testing"

Reviewer: Suggestion:

- An engineer's guide to running successful A/B tests

Reviewer: Some variations...

- A/B tests that work: A software engineer's guide
- A software engineer's guide to A/B tests that work

You might be right about your original.

rootPage: /blog
sidebar: Blog
showTitle: true
hideAnchor: true
author: ['lior-neu-ner']
featuredImage: ../images/blog/experiment-hog.jpg
featuredImageType: full
category: Product growth
tags: 
  - Guides
  - Product metrics
---

A/B testing enables you to be confident that your product changes are having their intended effects. Rather than making decisions based on gut feeling or intuition, A/B testing provides empirical data to help you remove bias from decision making.

> Companies like [Netflix](https://uxdesign.cc/how-netflix-does-a-b-testing-87df9f9bf57c), [Uber](https://www.uber.com/en-GB/blog/supercharging-a-b-testing-at-uber/) and [Booking.com](https://booking.ai/tagged/ab-testing) use A/B testing to ship hundreds of changes a day. In this post, we'll teach you basic concepts to get you started in A/B testing and supercharge your product growth!

Reviewer: I think we can come back to this last, but this intro doesn't work for me. Can we lean into your credentials here? Afaik, you have a lot of experience doing A/B tests at Meta etc. (and on your own project), let's talk about that. Write it in the first person ("I will guide you through") rather than third person ("we'll teach you the basics").

Reviewer: Maybe have a play around with this in an intro and throughout. Where possible, it's better to be opinionated. Drawing from your experience, and writing in first person, might lift the whole piece up a level.

> **Note:** A/B tests are commonly referred to as "experiments".

## How A/B testing works

In A/B testing, you first decide on a goal metric and what change you'd like to see. For example, you may to increase conversion rate, or you may want to decrease customer churn rate. Then, once you've made your code changes and are ready to test, you **randomly** split your users into two (or more) groups:

- The control group: these users will experience your product as is – without any of your new changes.
- The test group: these users will experience your product with your new changes.

You then run your A/B test for some time, usually a few days or weeks, to gather data and compare the differences in the goal metric between the different groups.

![How A/B testing works](../images/blog/ab-testing-guide-for-engineers/ab-test-illustration.png)

> **Note:** These groups are also referred to as "variants".

## What makes a good A/B test?

There are five parts to a good A/B test:

### 1. A clear, measurable goal

> Like "increase conversion rate by 10%", or "decrease churn rate by 5%". Without a clear goal, it can be unclear what is a successful outcome of test.

Reviewer: I'm not the expect here, but surely it's acceptable to have a metric you want to measure without a pre-defined "I want to increase it by this much" success goal?

### 2. A clear hypothesis why your your changes will achieve your goal

This focuses your testing on what changes you're making and why.

> Here's an example of a good hypothesis for a SaaS product: "Adding a short tutorial video on the login page will increase user engagement by 30% because it will help new users understand how to use our product more effectively."

Reviewer: I think we should add a bit more here. Feels too light.

Author: Yeah fair enough. I was trying to avoid repeating what I said in the other blog, but I do need to expand more here

---
date: 2023-07-04
title: "A software engineer's guide to A/B testing"
rootPage: /blog
sidebar: Blog
showTitle: true
hideAnchor: true
author: ['lior-neu-ner']
featuredImage: ../images/blog/experiment-hog.jpg
featuredImageType: full

> featuredVideo: https://www.youtube-nocookie.com/embed/C2ICJbICfsg

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

category: Product growth
tags: 
  - Guides
  - Product metrics
---

A/B testing enables you to be confident that your product changes are having their intended effects. Rather than making decisions based on gut feeling or intuition, A/B testing provides empirical data to help you remove bias from decision making.

> Companies like [Netflix](https://uxdesign.cc/how-netflix-does-a-b-testing-87df9f9bf57c), [Uber](https://www.uber.com/en-GB/blog/supercharging-a-b-testing-at-uber/) and [Booking.com](https://booking.ai/tagged/ab-testing) use A/B testing to ship hundreds of changes a day. In this blog, we'll teach you basic concepts to get you started in A/B testing and supercharge your product growth!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Companies like [Netflix](https://uxdesign.cc/how-netflix-does-a-b-testing-87df9f9bf57c), [Uber](https://www.uber.com/en-GB/blog/supercharging-a-b-testing-at-uber/) and [Booking.com](https://booking.ai/tagged/ab-testing) use A/B testing to improve their apps in hundreds of ways each day. In this post, we'll teach you basic concepts to get you started in A/B testing and supercharge your product growth!
```
A/B tests are a bit downstream of just "shipping"

> > **Note:** A/B tests are commonly referred to as "experiments".

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```
Lets just mention this when it comes up

Reviewer: Agreed

## How A/B testing works

> In A/B testing, you first decide on a goal metric and what change you'd like to see. For example, you may to increase conversion rate, or you may want to decrease customer churn rate. Then, once you've made your code changes and are ready to test, you **randomly** split your users into two (or more) groups:

Reviewer 2: Have an idea of something you'd like to change or test might come first?

> In A/B testing, you first decide on a goal metric and what change you'd like to see. For example, you may to increase conversion rate, or you may want to decrease customer churn rate. Then, once you've made your code changes and are ready to test, you **randomly** split your users into two (or more) groups:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In A/B testing, you first decide on a goal metric and what change you'd like to see. For example, you may to increase conversion rate or decrease customer churn rate. Once you've made your code changes and are ready to test, you **randomly** split your users into two (or more) groups:
```
- Where changes take place is important to decide on too.
- How do you split your users up? Using a service? config?

- The control group: these users will experience your product as is – without any of your new changes.
- The test group: these users will experience your product with your new changes.

> You then run your A/B test for some time, usually a few days or weeks, to gather data and compare the differences in the goal metric between the different groups.

Reviewer 2: A little bit more on calculating how long could be valuable here.

Author: This is covered more below. But based on this (and some of your other feedback), I think it would be useful to outline what topics will be covered in the intro, so to give an idea of when to expect each topic

![How A/B testing works](../images/blog/ab-testing-guide-for-engineers/ab-test-illustration.png)

> > **Note:** These groups are also referred to as "variants".

Reviewer 2: Groups refers to users, variants usually refers to the code/config so I wouldn't say so. Maybe needs rewording.

## What makes a good A/B test?

There are five parts to a good A/B test:

> ### 1. Has a clear, measurable goal

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### 1. A clear, measurable goal
```

Like "increase conversion rate by 10%", or "decrease churn rate by 5%". Without a clear goal, it can be unclear what is a successful outcome of test.

> ### 2. Has a clear hypothesis why your your changes will achieve your goal

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### 2. A clear hypothesis why your your changes will achieve your goal
```

This focuses your testing on what changes you're making and why.

> Here's an example of a good hypothesis for a SaaS Product: "Adding a short tutorial video on the login page will increase user engagement by 30% because it will help new users understand how to use our product more effectively."

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Here's an example of a good hypothesis for a SaaS product: "Adding a short tutorial video on the login page will increase user engagement by 30% because it will help new users understand how to use our product more effectively."
```

> See our blog on [A/B testing mistakes](https://posthog.com/blog/ab-testing-mistakes#7-testing-an-unclear-hypothesis) to read more on how to avoid testing an unclear hypothesis.

### 3. Tests as small of a change as *reasonably* possible 

> Ideally, an A/B test should change one thing at a time. This ensures that any change in user behavior can be attributed to the variable that was changed. If multiple variables are changed, it's difficult to determine which one caused the change in behavior.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Ideally, an A/B test should change one thing at a time. This ensures that any change in user behavior can be attributed to what was changed. If there are multiple changes, it's difficult to determine which one caused the change in behavior.
```

> However, the caveat here is that too small of change can slow your team down. Since running A/B tests take time, if you're constantly testing small changes it may take long to ship large, meaningful changes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The caveat here is that too small of change can slow your team down. Since running A/B tests take time, if you're constantly testing small changes, it may take long to ship large, meaningful changes.
```

> A good rule of thumb to know if your change is too small is if it's unlikely to impact user behavior significantly. To help inform this decision, you can use qualitative data from user research or quantitative data from previous A/B tests.

Reviewer 2: The right change size depends on:
- Scale of company (number of users involved in A/B tests). Big companies make small changes, small companies make big changes.
- Risk of change (potential impact). Changing a finance algorithm that can lose $ms shouldn't be A/B tests, but a homepage piece of copy can.

Impact user behavior significantly is too vague IMO.

Reviewer 2: Also quantitative data doesn't have to be only from previous A/B tests, normal analytics can be used too.

> ### 4. Has a sufficiently large sample size of users

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### 4. A sufficiently large sample size of users
```

A large sample size for your test ensures the *statistical significance* of your experiment results i.e., if you can be confident that your results are not due to chance, but rather a true effect of the changes you made.

To know whether your change is large enough, you'll need to know:

> 1. Your current conversion rate.

Reviewer 2: It's not necessarily just conversion, can be growth in other metrics as well.

2. Your "minimum detectable effect" i.e., the smallest change in the conversion rate that you want to detect. The smaller the change, the larger the sample size you'll need.
3. Your desired level of confidence (the industry standard is 95%).

> You then use a [formula](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sample_size_determination) to determine if your sample size is large enough. There are many calculators online that will do this for you, so you can avoid calculating this yourself (We also include this calculator when creating a new [A/B test in PostHog](/ab-testing/features)).

Reviewer 2: Can you show what the formula is here?

> ### 5. Has a long enough test duration

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### 5. A long enough test duration
```

Reviewer 2: Aren't sample size and duration linked? Could this be one point?

Building on the notion of ensuring statistical significant results, once you've calculated your required sample size, you'll be able to calculate how long your experiment should run for. You do this by dividing your sample size by your daily number of eligible users.

For example, if you're making changes to your signup flow and your required sample size is 1,000 new sign-ups. If your daily number of sign-ups is 100, then you'll need to run your experiment for `1,000 / 100 = 10 days`.

Once again, there are many calculators online to help you determine your duration, and PostHog also includes this calculator when creating a new experiment.

> **A good rule of thumb is that your experiment duration should be between one week and one month:
> **

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**A good rule of thumb is that your experiment duration should be between one week and one month:**
```

- One week is a good minimum since users may behave differently on weekends or weekdays.

> - One month is a good maximum since otherwise you may delay shipping important product changes.

Reviewer 2: How long do we normally run A/B tests for? What about top companies?

This could be a graphic.

Author: It always depends on what you're testing, your sample size, and the expected change in metric. Its differs wildy across features (not companies). I dont think its worth including

> ## When not to A/B test

Reviewer 2: This doesn't feel like a super compelling section right now. Feels a bit like "when an A/B test is the opposite of a good A/B test," so not super necessary.

Reviewer: I kind of agree, mainly because this breaks the flow somewhat to the next section, but I think it's still useful info. Maybe we move this into the FAQ section?

> There's are costs and trade-offs to running A/B tests, and so it may not be a good idea to always run them. Here a few scenarios in which you may not want to run an A/B test:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There's are costs and trade-offs to running A/B tests so it may not always be a good idea to run them. Here a few scenarios in which you may not want to run an A/B test:
```

- **When you lack of sufficient traffic or users, or have time constraints:** It won't be possible to gather enough data to obtain the statistically significant results required to make good decisions.

- **When you have high implementation costs:** Sometimes it may create a lot of technical debt to support and maintain both control and test variants of your experiment.

> - **When you have opportunity costs:** The time and resources it takes to implement and analyze A/B tests may be better spent working on other projects.

Reviewer 2: These could be combined?

Author: Hmm perhaps. I think better to have them separate. Opprotunity cost is implied in "high implementation costs". but I think it's better to call it out as it's own point (it's not always necessarily related to implementation)

In the above scenarios, it may be better to rely on qualitative feedback or user research for decision making.

## How to implement a good A/B test

Once you're satisfied that your experiment meets the [criteria of a good A/B test](#what-makes-a-good-ab-test), it's time to implement it in your code. This is typically done by using [feature flags](/feature-flags/features) to randomly assign users to an experiment variant, and then logging when users are exposed to the variant i.e., trigger the code path that checks for the feature flag. This enables you to compare metrics in aggregate between the users in your variants.

It's absolutely **essential** to only log the users in your experiment who are actually impacted by the changes you're testing. Users who aren't affected by your test should be excluded. If you include unaffected users, their unchanged behavior will mix in with your results, thereby watering down the impact and the clarity of your findings.

To do so, ensure that checking your feature flag and logging their exposure is the *absolute* last condition you check in your code: 

> ```

Reviewer 2: Could we do a multi language block here? or would that look dumb?

Author: This is more pseudo-code than actual code, so I dont think we need to add a multilanguage block

Reviewer 2: I'm thinking like one tab of multilanguage block says "Incorrect" and the other says "Correct" instead of having one long block.

Author: ah, nice idea. I'll try it out

Author: Tried it out but didnt render correctly. It rendered as 2 separate code blocks. I dont think the multilangauge compeonet is enable in the blog?

- **Check you gathered enough data:**  If your sample size was too small or your testing period was too short, you might need to extend the duration of your experiment to gather more data.

- **Consider smaller changes:** If you made a large change, it could be that smaller aspects of the change had different impacts – some positive, some negative, leading to an overall insignificant result. Consider breaking down the change into smaller parts and testing these individually.

- **Consider larger changes:** Conversely, if your change was too subtle or minor, it may not have been enough to affect user behavior. In this case, consider making a more impactful change and then testing that.

- **Review your hypothesis:** It could be that your hypothesis was not correct, and the change you made did not impact user behavior in the way you expected. Take this as a learning opportunity to gain deeper insights into your users.

- **Accept the results:** Sometimes, an insignificant result is the correct result. It tells you that the change you made didn't have the impact you thought it would. This is still a valuable insight, and helps you shipping unnecessary changes.

> 
> Calculate Effect Size
> Review Secondary Metrics
> 
> how to interpret the results - a few examples 
>  - what happens if not statistical signfiance?
>  - what happens if statsical significant 
> determining your next steps
> 

Author: ```suggestion

```

---

> date: 2023-07-04

Reviewer: ```suggestion
date: 2023-10-04
```

title: "A software engineer's guide to A/B testing"
rootPage: /blog
sidebar: Blog
showTitle: true
hideAnchor: true
author: ['lior-neu-ner']
featuredImage: ../images/blog/experiment-hog.jpg
featuredImageType: full
category: Product growth
tags: 
  - Guides
  - Product metrics
---

> A/B testing enables you to be confident that your product changes are having their intended effects. Rather than making decisions based on gut feeling or intuition, A/B testing provides empirical data to help you remove bias from decision making.
> 
> This post is for software engineers who are just getting started with A/B testing. We'll teach you the basic concepts on how to run a successful test and supercharge your product growth!
> 
> We'll cover:
> - [How A/B testing works](#how-ab-testing-works)
> - [What makes a good A/B test?](#what-makes-a-good-ab-test)
> - [How to implement a good A/B test](#how-to-implement-a-good-ab-test)
> - [Monitoring your A/B test](#monitoring-your-ab-test)
> - [Analyzing your results](#analyzing-your-results)
> - [Frequently asked questions](#frequently-asked-questions)
> - [Launch checklist](#launch-checklist)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As a software engineer, you have two options:

1. YOLO every change and hope they have the desired impact.
2. Track user metrics and run A/B tests to verify your changes have the desired effect.

One is easier than other, but the easy way rarely works in the long term. This guide is for software engineers who are just getting started with A/B testing. In it, you'll learn

- How to devise good A/B tests
- How to implement and monitor your tests
- How to analyze you results (statistically significant, or not)

I'll also cover some frequently answered questions, such as when you _shouldn't_ run A/B tests, and there's a simple [A/B test launch checklist]((#launch-checklist)) you can use when you run your own tests.
```

Author: Love the new intro!

This is a good hypothesis because it enables you to break down which metrics you'll focus on in your test:

- How many users watch the video.
- What portion of the video did they view.
- Successful interactions with the app features.
- The number of customer support queries.
- Churn rate.

Then, once you've collected data with your test, you can use these metrics to analyze if your test was a success or not.

### 3. Tests as small of a change as *reasonably* possible 

Ideally, an A/B test should change one thing at a time. This ensures that any change in user behavior can be attributed to what was changed. If there are multiple changes, it's difficult to determine which one caused the change in behavior.

The caveat here is that too small of change can slow your team down. Since running A/B tests take time, if you're constantly testing small changes, it may take long to ship large, meaningful changes.

> A good rule of thumb to know if your change is too small is if it's unlikely to impact user behavior significantly. To help inform this decision, you can use qualitative data from user research or quantitative data from existing logging or previous A/B tests.

Reviewer: I was referring to using qual / quant data to decide data to determine if a change is likely to impact user behavior. On reflection, it's not really a big deal. We shouldn't teach people to suck eggs!

To counteract this, predetermine your test duration (based on the [sample size required](#4-has-a-sufficiently-large-sample-size-of-users)) and to only make decisions based on the data collected during the entire duration.

## Launch checklist

Launching an A/B test requires careful planning to ensure accurate results and meaningful insights. To help you navigate this, we've put together this launch checklist:

**Before launch**

- [ ] A clear goal metric.
- [ ] A clear hypothesis.
- [ ] Secondary metrics.
- [ ] Counter metrics.
- [ ] Predefined test duration, based on sample size.
- [ ] A/B test code only includes eligible users that will be affected by the change.
- [ ] QA checks on both control and test variants.

**24-48 hours after launch:**

- [ ] Volume of users assigned to each variant is as expected.
- [ ] All logging is working correctly and in correct ratios.
- [ ] No increase in crashes or errors.

**At the end of the test duration**

- [ ] Validate or invalidate your hypothesis based on experiment data.
- [ ] Document your results and share with your team for feedback.

> - [ ] Ship the code for the winning variant. Delete the code for the losing variant.

Author: I tried this out after you suggested it. It didn't look so great, so opted not to do it

- [Monitoring your A/B test](#monitoring-your-ab-test)
- [Analyzing your results](#analyzing-your-results)
- [Frequently asked questions](#frequently-asked-questions)
- [Launch checklist](#launch-checklist)

## How A/B testing works

In A/B testing, you first decide on a goal metric and what change you'd like to see. For example, you may to increase conversion rate or decrease customer churn rate. 

With your goal in mind and your code changes ready, you **randomly** split your users into two (or more) groups:

- **The control group** – These users will experience your product as is – without any of your new changes.

- **The test group** – These users will experience your product with your new changes.

You then run your A/B test to gather data (usually a few days or weeks) and compare the differences in the goal metric between the different groups.

![How A/B testing works](../images/blog/ab-testing-guide-for-engineers/ab-test-illustration.png)

## What makes a good A/B test?

There are five parts to a good A/B test:

### 1. A clear, measurable goal

Like "increase paid conversion rate", or "decrease churn rate". This should be a *single* metric that you're aiming to improve.

> Without a clear goal, it's unclear what is a successful outcome of test. For example, a bad goal is "increase user engagement", since it's unclear which metric will define success – is it daily active visitors, total number of page views, or time spent in the app?

Author: ```suggestion
Without a clear goal, it's unclear what a successful outcome of the test is. For example, a bad goal is "increase user engagement", since it's unclear which metric will define success – is it daily active visitors, total number of page views, or time spent in the app?
```

* Check your exposure logging. For example, that the volume of users assigned to the control and test variant is what you'd expect it to be.

* Check your event logging e.g., ensure that you're receiving all the events you expect to receive, and in the right ratios.

* Monitor crashes or error rates to ensure that your test is not causing any issues. 

Once you're sure that everything is running smoothly, try to avoid frequently checking the results until the test is finished. Checking too often can lead to reactive decisions based on incomplete data. It's usually best to wait until the test ends to make any decisions, as you'll have the best data at that point.

## Analyzing your results

Once your test has run its duration and you've collected enough data, you're ready to look at the results. What you're looking for is statistical significant change in any of the following metrics:

1. **Your goal metric.**

2. **Any secondary metrics.** These are usually metrics that are closely related to your goal metric. For example, if your goal metric is to increase paid conversions, a secondary metric may be to increase sign-ups.

> 3. **Any counter metrics.** These are metrics that ensure your user experience isn't degrading. For example, if your goal is to increase sign-ups, you should also verify your churn rate is not increasing.

Author: ```suggestion
3. **Any counter metrics.** These are metrics that ensure your user experience isn't deteriorating. For example, if your goal is to increase sign-ups, you should also verify your churn rate is not increasing.
```

---

> date: 2023-11-04

Reviewer: ```suggestion
date: 2023-07-13
```

title: "A software engineer's guide to A/B testing"
rootPage: /blog
sidebar: Blog
showTitle: true
hideAnchor: true
author: ['lior-neu-ner']
featuredImage: ../images/blog/experiment-hog.jpg
featuredImageType: full
category: Product growth
tags: 
  - Guides
---

As a software engineer, you have two options:

1. YOLO every change and hope they have the desired impact.
2. Track user metrics and run A/B tests to verify your changes have the desired effect.

One is easier than other, but the easy way rarely works in the long term. This guide is for software engineers who are just getting started with A/B testing. In it, you'll learn:

- How to devise good A/B tests
- How to implement and monitor your tests
- How to analyze your results (statistically significant, or not)

> We'll also cover some frequently answered questions, such as when you _shouldn't_ run A/B tests, and we've added a simple [A/B test launch checklist]((#launch-checklist)) you can use when you run your own tests.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We'll also cover some frequently answered questions, such as when you _shouldn't_ run A/B tests, and we've added a simple [A/B test launch checklist](#a-b-test-launch-checklist) you can use when you run your own tests.
```

## How A/B testing works

> Feel free to skip this if you already understand the basics, but here's a quick ELI5 for newcomers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here's a quick ELI5 for newcomers – please skip if you're already familiar with the basics.
```

You then run your A/B test to gather data (usually a few days or weeks) and compare the differences in the goal metric between the different groups.

![How A/B testing works](../images/blog/ab-testing-guide-for-engineers/ab-test-illustration.jpg)

There are a few different types of A/B test, such as multivariate (where you're testing more than one variation) and multi-page "funnel" tests (where you're testing different user paths), but this guide is focused traditional A/B tests. 

## What makes a good A/B test?

There are five parts to a good A/B test:

### 1. A clear, measurable goal

Like "increase paid conversion rate", or "decrease churn rate". This should be a *single* metric that you're aiming to improve.

"Increase user engagement" is an example of a bad goal, since it's unclear which metric will define success – is it daily active visitors, total number of page views, or time spent in the app? Your test results may show improvements in some metrics, but declines in others.

No clear, measurable goal = ambiguous results you can't action.

### 2. A clear hypothesis about why your changes will achieve your goal

> 
> A well-defined hypothesis focuses your testing and guides your decision-making by providing a framework for evaluating your results. It should include your goal metric, how you think your change will improve it, and any other important context. For example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Not having a well-defined hypothesis is one of the most [common A/B testing mistakes](/blog/ab-testing-mistakes) people make.

A good hypothesis focuses your testing and guides your decision-making by providing a framework for evaluating your results. It should include your goal metric, how you think your change will improve it, and any other important context. For example:
```

> Showing a short tutorial video during onboarding will help users understand how to use our product. As a result, we expect to see more successful interactions with the app, fewer customer support queries, and reduced churn (our primary goal) among tested users.

This is a good hypothesis because it enables you to break down which metrics you'll focus on in your test:

> - How many users watch the video.
> - What portion of the video did they view.
> - Successful interactions with the app features.
> - The number of customer support queries.
> - Churn rate.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- How many users watch the video
- What portion of the video did they view
- Successful interactions with the app features
- The number of customer support queries
- Churn rate
```

A good rule of thumb to know if your change is too small is if it's unlikely to impact user behavior significantly. You can use qualitative data from user research or quantitative data from existing logging, or previous A/B tests, to inform this decision

### 4. A sufficiently large sample size of users

A large sample size for your test ensures the *statistical significance* of your results – i.e. if you can be confident your results are due to changes you made, rather than random chance.

To know whether your sample size is large enough, you'll need to know:

1. **The current conversion rate for your metric.** This is the percentage of users who performed the desired action (e.g., make a purchase, sign up) out of the total number of eligible users.

2. **Your "minimum detectable effect".** The smallest change in the conversion rate that you want to detect. The smaller the change, the larger the sample size you'll need.

3. **Your desired level of confidence.** The industry standard is 95%.

> You then use a [formula](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sample_size_determination) to determine if your sample size is large enough. There are many calculators online that will do this for you, so you can avoid calculating this yourself – [A/B tests in PostHog](/ab-testing/features) calculate this for you automatically.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You then use a [sample size determination formula](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sample_size_determination) to determine if your sample size is large enough. There are many calculators online that will do this for you, so you can avoid calculating this yourself – [A/B tests in PostHog](/ab-testing/features) calculate this for you automatically.
```

* Monitor crashes or error rates to ensure that your test is not causing any issues. 

Once you're sure that everything is running smoothly, try to avoid frequently checking the results until the test is finished. Checking too often can lead to reactive decisions based on incomplete data. It's usually best to wait until the test ends to make any decisions, as you'll have the best data at that point.

## Analyzing your results

Once your test has run its duration, and you've collected enough data, you're ready to look at the results. What you're looking for is statistical significant change in any of the following metrics:

1. **Your goal metric.**

2. **Any secondary metrics.** These are usually metrics that are closely related to your goal metric. For example, if your goal metric is to increase paid conversions, a secondary metric may be to increase sign-ups.

3. **Any counter metrics.** These are metrics that ensure your user experience isn't deteriorating. For example, if your goal is to increase sign-ups, you should also verify your churn rate is not increasing.

> Most A/B testing tools, including [PostHog](/ab-testing/features), will calculate statistical significance for you. To do so manually, you'll need to input the number of users in each variant, and the conversion rate for each metric, into an [online calculator](https://abtestguide.com/calc/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Most A/B testing tools, including [PostHog](/ab-testing/features), will calculate statistical significance for you. To do so manually, you'll need to input the number of users in each variant, and the conversion rate for each metric, into an online calculator.
```

- When you're implementing a refactor to your codebase, you can use an A/B test to ensure your refactor does not perform worse.

### Can I stop an A/B test as soon as the results are significant?

While it can be tempting to stop a test as soon as the results appear significant, doing so can lead to false positives. This is known as the [peeking problem](/blog/ab-testing-mistakes#3-conducting-an-experiment-without-a-predetermined-duration) – i.e. the more often you check the results, the greater the chance you'll observe a false positive, a result that appears to be significant, but is actually due to random chance. 

To counteract this, predetermine your test duration (based on the [sample size required](#4-has-a-sufficiently-large-sample-size-of-users)) and only make decisions based on the data collected during the entire duration.

## A/B test launch checklist

Launching an A/B test requires careful planning to ensure accurate results and meaningful insights. To help you navigate this, we've put together this launch checklist:

```

> **Before launch**
> 
> - [ ] A clear goal metric.
> - [ ] A clear hypothesis.
> - [ ] Secondary metrics.
> - [ ] Counter metrics.
> - [ ] Predefined test duration, based on sample size.
> - [ ] A/B test code only includes eligible users that will be affected by the change.
> - [ ] QA checks on both control and test variants.
> 
> **24-48 hours after launch:**
> 
> - [ ] Volume of users assigned to each variant is as expected.
> - [ ] All logging is working correctly and in correct ratios.
> - [ ] No increase in crashes or errors.
> 
> **At the end of the test duration**
> 
> - [ ] Validate or invalidate your hypothesis based on experiment data.
> - [ ] Document your results and share with your team for feedback.
> - [ ] Ship the code for the winning variant. Delete the code for the losing variant.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Before launch**

- [ ] A clear goal metric.
- [ ] A clear hypothesis.
- [ ] Secondary metrics.
- [ ] Counter metrics.
- [ ] Predefined test duration, based on sample size.
- [ ] Test code only includes eligible users that will be affected by change.
- [ ] QA checks on both control and test variants.

**24-48 hours after launch:**

- [ ] Volume of users assigned to each variant is as expected.
- [ ] All logging is working correctly and in correct ratios.
- [ ] No increase in crashes or errors.

**At the end of the test duration**

- [ ] Validate or invalidate your hypothesis based on experiment data.
- [ ] Document your results and share with your team for feedback.
- [ ] Ship code for the winning variant. Delete code for the losing variant.
```

---
date: 2023-07-13
title: "A software engineer's guide to A/B testing"
rootPage: /blog
sidebar: Blog
showTitle: true
hideAnchor: true
author: ['lior-neu-ner']
featuredImage: ../images/blog/experiment-hog.jpg
featuredImageType: full
category: Product growth
tags: 
  - Guides
---

As a software engineer, you have two options:

1. YOLO every change and hope they have the desired impact.
2. Track user metrics and run A/B tests to verify your changes have the desired effect.

> One is easier than other, but the easy way rarely works in the long term. This guide is for software engineers who are just getting started with A/B testing. In it, you'll learn:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One is easier than the other, but the easy way rarely works in the long term. This guide is for software engineers who are just getting started with A/B testing. In it, you'll learn:
```

- How to devise good A/B tests
- How to implement and monitor your tests
- How to analyze your results (statistically significant, or not)

> We'll also cover some frequently answered questions, such as when you _shouldn't_ run A/B tests, and we've added a simple [A/B test launch checklist](#a-b-test-launch-checklist) you can use when you run your own tests.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We'll also cover some frequently asked questions, such as when you _shouldn't_ run A/B tests, and we've added a simple [A/B test launch checklist](#ab-test-launch-checklist) to use when you run your own tests.
```

## How A/B testing works

Here's a quick ELI5 for newcomers – please skip if you're already familiar with the basics.

In A/B testing, you first decide on a goal metric and what change you'd like to see. For example, you may to increase conversion rate or decrease customer churn rate. 

With your goal in mind and your code changes ready, you **randomly** split your users into two (or more) groups:

- **The control group** – These users will experience your product as is – without any of your new changes.

- **The test group** – These users will experience your product with your new changes.

> You then run your A/B test to gather data (usually a few days or weeks) and compare the differences in the goal metric between the different groups.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You then run your A/B test to gather data (usually over a few days or weeks) and compare the differences in the goal metric between the different groups.
```

![How A/B testing works](../images/blog/ab-testing-guide-for-engineers/ab-test-illustration.jpg)

There are a few different types of A/B test, such as multivariate (where you're testing more than one variation) and multi-page "funnel" tests (where you're testing different user paths), but this guide is focused traditional A/B tests. 

## What makes a good A/B test?

There are five parts to a good A/B test:

### 1. A clear, measurable goal

Like "increase paid conversion rate", or "decrease churn rate". This should be a *single* metric that you're aiming to improve.

"Increase user engagement" is an example of a bad goal, since it's unclear which metric will define success – is it daily active visitors, total number of page views, or time spent in the app? Your test results may show improvements in some metrics, but declines in others.

No clear, measurable goal = ambiguous results you can't action.

### 2. A clear hypothesis about why your changes will achieve your goal

> Not creating a well-defined hypothesis is one of the most [common A/B testing mistakes](/blog/ab-testing-mistakes).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

Not creating a well-defined hypothesis is one of the most [common A/B testing mistakes](/blog/ab-testing-mistakes).
```

> Not having a well-defined hypothesis is one of the most [common A/B testing mistakes](/blog/ab-testing-mistakes) people make.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Not creating a well-defined hypothesis is one of the most [common A/B testing mistakes](/blog/ab-testing-mistakes).
```

> Showing a short tutorial video during onboarding will help users understand how to use our product. As a result, we expect to see more successful interactions with the app, fewer customer support queries, and reduced churn (our primary goal) among tested users.

This is a good hypothesis because it enables you to break down which metrics you'll focus on in your test:

- How many users watch the video
- What portion of the video did they view
- Successful interactions with the app features
- The number of customer support queries
- Churn rate

Then, once you've collected data with your test, you can use these metrics to analyze if your test was a success or not.

### 3. Testing as small of a change as *reasonably* possible 

Ideally, an A/B test should change one thing at a time. This ensures that any change in user behavior can be attributed to what was changed. If there are multiple changes, it's difficult to determine which one caused the change in behavior.

The caveat here is that too small of change can slow your team down. Since running A/B tests take time, if you're constantly testing small changes, it will take longer to ship large, meaningful changes.

> A good rule of thumb to know if your change is too small is if it's unlikely to impact user behavior significantly. You can use qualitative data from user research or quantitative data from existing logging, or previous A/B tests, to inform this decision

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A good rule of thumb to know if your change is too small is if it's unlikely to impact user behavior significantly. You can use qualitative data from user research, quantitative data from existing logging, or previous A/B tests to inform this decision
```

### 4. A sufficiently large sample size of users

A large sample size for your test ensures the *statistical significance* of your results – i.e. if you can be confident your results are due to changes you made, rather than random chance.

To know whether your sample size is large enough, you'll need to know:

> 1. **The current conversion rate for your metric.** This is the percentage of users who performed the desired action (e.g., make a purchase, sign up) out of the total number of eligible users.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. **The current count or conversion rate for your metric.** This is the count or percentage of users who performed the desired action (e.g., click a button, make a purchase, sign up) out of the total number of eligible users.
```

> 2. **Your "minimum detectable effect".** The smallest change in the conversion rate that you want to detect. The smaller the change, the larger the sample size you'll need.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. **Your "minimum detectable effect".** The smallest change in the count or conversion rate that you want to detect. The smaller the change, the larger the sample size you'll need.
```

3. **Your desired level of confidence.** The industry standard is 95%.

> You then use a [sample size determination formula](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sample_size_determination) to determine if your sample size is large enough. There are many calculators online that will do this for you, so you can avoid calculating this yourself – [A/B tests in PostHog](/ab-testing/features) calculate this for you automatically.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You then use a [sample size determination formula](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sample_size_determination) to determine if your sample size is large enough. There are many calculators online that will do this for you, so you can avoid calculating this yourself – [A/B tests in PostHog](/ab-testing) calculate this for you automatically.
```

```
// ❌ Incorrect. Will include unaffected users
function showNewChanges(user) {
  if (posthog.getFeatureFlag('experiment-key') === 'control') {
    return false;
  }

  if (user.hasCompletedAction) {
    return false
  }

  // other checks

  return true
}
```

```
// ✅ Correct. Will exclude unaffected users
function showNewChanges(user) {

  if (user.hasCompletedAction) {
    return false
  }

  // other checks

  if (posthog.getFeatureFlag('experiment-key') === 'control') {
    return false;
  }

  return true
}
```

## Monitoring your A/B test

Once you've started your A/B test, it's a good idea to check in on it 24-48 hours after launch to ensure that everything is running correctly. Here's a list of things to check:

* Check your exposure logging. For example, that the volume of users assigned to the control and test variant is what you'd expect it to be.

* Check your event logging – i.e. that you're receiving all the events you expect to receive, and in the right ratios.

* Monitor crashes or error rates to ensure that your test is not causing any issues. 

> Once you're sure that everything is running smoothly, try to avoid frequently checking the results until the test is finished. Checking too often can lead to reactive decisions based on incomplete data. It's usually best to wait until the test ends to make any decisions, as you'll have the best data at that point.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Once you're sure that everything is running smoothly, try to avoid frequently checking the results until the test is finished. Checking too often can lead to reactive decisions based on incomplete data. It's usually best to wait until the test ends to make any decisions, as you'll have more accurate data at that point.
```

## Analyzing your results

> Once your test has run its duration, and you've collected enough data, you're ready to look at the results. What you're looking for is statistical significant change in any of the following metrics:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Once your test has run its duration and you've collected enough data, you're ready to look at the results. What you're looking for is a statistically significant change in any of the following metrics:
```

1. **Your goal metric.**

2. **Any secondary metrics.** These are usually metrics that are closely related to your goal metric. For example, if your goal metric is to increase paid conversions, a secondary metric may be to increase sign-ups.

3. **Any counter metrics.** These are metrics that ensure your user experience isn't deteriorating. For example, if your goal is to increase sign-ups, you should also verify your churn rate is not increasing.

> Most A/B testing tools, including [PostHog](/ab-testing/features), will calculate statistical significance for you. To do so manually, you'll need to input the number of users in each variant, and the conversion rate for each metric, into an online calculator.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
These metrics must have statistically significant changes because that means the impact is larger than random in 95% (or your confidence level) of cases. Most A/B testing tools, including [PostHog](/ab-testing), calculate statistical significance for you. To do so manually, you'll need to input the number of users in each variant, and the conversion rate for each metric, into an online calculator.
```

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure if this is more or less confusing. It just might be useful to note why we care about statistical significant. Feel free to trash if it makes it worse.

> ### What if my results are _not_ statistically significant?

Reviewer 2: Good section 😄

In the above scenarios, it may be better to rely on qualitative feedback or user research for decision-making.

### Can I run multiple A/B tests at the same time?

Yes, you can run multiple A/B tests at the same time, but doing so can complicate things and should be approached with caution. It can be tricky since if tests are not completely independent, the changes being tested can affect each other.

To counteract this, you'll need a larger sample size of users. This is what enables apps like Facebook or Uber to run *thousands* of tests at the same time, since they have millions (or billions!) of users.

### Are A/B tests only for product changes?

No, you can also use A/B tests for infrastructure changes, such as:

- If you're considering a new caching strategy or database system, you could split your traffic between the old and new systems to see which performs better. 

> - When you're implementing a refactor to your codebase, you can use an A/B test to ensure your refactor does not perform worse.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- When you're refactoring your codebase, you can use an A/B test to ensure your refactor does not perform worse.
```

### Can I stop an A/B test as soon as the results are significant?

While it can be tempting to stop a test as soon as the results appear significant, doing so can lead to false positives. This is known as the [peeking problem](/blog/ab-testing-mistakes#3-conducting-an-experiment-without-a-predetermined-duration) – i.e. the more often you check the results, the greater the chance you'll observe a false positive, a result that appears to be significant, but is actually due to random chance. 

To counteract this, predetermine your test duration (based on the [sample size required](#4-has-a-sufficiently-large-sample-size-of-users)) and only make decisions based on the data collected during the entire duration.

## A/B test launch checklist

Launching an A/B test requires careful planning to ensure accurate results and meaningful insights. To help you navigate this, we've put together this launch checklist:

```
**Before launch**

- [ ] A clear goal metric.
- [ ] A clear hypothesis.
- [ ] Secondary metrics.
- [ ] Counter metrics.
- [ ] Predefined test duration, based on sample size.

> - [ ] Test code only includes eligible users that will be affected by change.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [ ] Code only includes eligible users that will be affected by change.
```

- [ ] QA checks on both control and test variants.

**24-48 hours after launch:**

- [ ] Volume of users assigned to each variant is as expected.
- [ ] All logging is working correctly and in correct ratios.
- [ ] No increase in crashes or errors.

**At the end of the test duration**

- [ ] Validate or invalidate your hypothesis based on experiment data.
- [ ] Document your results and share with your team for feedback.

> - [ ] Ship code for the winning variant. Delete code for the losing variant.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [ ] Ship winning variant code. Delete code for losing variant.
```

---
date: 2023-07-13

> title: "A software engineer's guide to A/B testing"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: "Intro to A/B testing for software engineers"
```
